The shelter's mission, at first, was merely to hand out coffee and used clothing and to offer a place where a few women could spend the night. That mission has greatly expanded.

In the mid-1970s, said Maria Foscarinis, executive director of the National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty, "single men constituted the vast majority of homeless people and shelters served men only; women literally had no options for shelter."

"Kip was a prescient first responder to a need that would only continue to grow," Ms. Foscarinis said.

According to the Department of Housing and Urban Development's annual assessment of homelessness, there were 1.59 million homeless people in the country last year, 38 percent of them women.

Ms. Foscarinis and Neil Donovan, executive director of the National Coalition for the Homeless, said Rosie's Place was the nation's first shelter established specifically to address the issues confronting homeless women.

"A major cause of homelessness for women is domestic violence, and that makes the need for separate, safe and secure shelter especially acute," Ms. Foscarinis said, adding that women with children "have a particular need for shelter that can accommodate them as a family."

With its slogan "Diapers to Detox," Rosie's Place tries to meet an array of issues. While the shelter has only 20 beds, it serves lunch and dinner to 150 women a day. Its pantry provides food to about 800 women a month. It helps women find housing and avoid utility shut-offs. There are 300 students in its literacy program. It offers drug and alcohol abuse counseling. A craft cooperative allows women to sell jewelry they have made.

"This is the way Kip thought it should be," Ms. Marsh said, "that they are our sisters."

Born in West Haven, Conn., on June 17, 1926, Mary Jane Tiernan was 6 months old when her father died and 11 when her mother died. Raised by her maternal grandmother, she took flying lessons as a teenager and became interested in jazz.

Ms. Tiernan moved to Boston in 1947 to study at the Boston Conservatory, but was expelled for drinking. "I was raped once," she told The Boston Globe in 1988. "I was 19. Drunk." After achieving sobriety through Alcoholics Anonymous, she eventually became a successful advertising copywriter with her own agency and began her volunteer work with Warwick House.

Ms. Tiernan is survived by her partner of 15 years, Donna Pomponio, whom she married in 2004. Her previous companion, Edith Nicholson, died in the 1990s. Together they raised Ms. Nicholson's three children, one of whom, Peg Wright, also survives.

Beside Rosie's Place, Ms. Tiernan helped found the Boston Health Care for the Homeless Program, the Greater Boston Food Bank and the city's Emergency Shelter Commission.

"She really had no stomach for people pitying the homeless without some type of follow-through that would improve the condition of the unhoused," Mr. Donovan, of the National Coalition for the Homeless, said. "She railed against politicians and bureaucrats for making empty promises or unfunded mandates and against homeless advocates who put their own organization or agenda first."
