Mr. Arnault, France's richest man and the force behind the vast LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton empire, is eager to put the Galliano affair behind him. For as jarring as this has been for Dior, Mr. Arnault is grasping at another lustrous pearl: Hermes International.

Since October, Mr. Arnault has been -- quite publicly -- circling Hermes, the 174-year-old family fief whose silk scarves and Kelly and Birkin handbags are coveted near and far.

Mr. Arnault says he will not interfere with Hermes's management or traditions. "We are a totally peaceful investor," he said in the interview last week. "But as a leader in the best quality products in the world, we believe we can bring a certain savoir-faire to improve the functioning of their business."

To people at Hermes, LVMH -- indeed, Mr. Arnault himself -- represents everything Hermes is not. He has spent the past three decades acquiring one luxury brand after another and then hiring designers like Mr. Galliano, Mr. McQueen and Marc Jacobs (for Louis Vuitton) to invigorate old labels. That Mr. Galliano was given the keys to Dior only to self-destruct with an anti-Semitic rant at a Paris bar seemed to confirm the worst fears of Hermes executives.

"There is a part of our world that is playing on abundance, on glitz and glamour," Patrick Thomas, the Hermes's chief executive, said during an interview the week before Mr. Galliano was fired. "And there is another part that is concentrated on refinement, and basically making beautiful objects."

Hermes counts itself among the latter, and it wants to stay that way. "We don't want to be a part of this financial world which is ruining companies and dealing with people like they are goods or raw materials," said Mr. Thomas, the first chief executive at Hermes who is not a member of the family. "It's not a financial fight, because we would lose that. It's a cultural fight."

AT 62, Bernard Arnault is a trim, willowy man with piercing blue eyes and an easy smile. He speaks only when he has something to say, a quality that can come off as cold or supremely self-confident, depending on which side of the table you're on.

Although Mr. Arnault was born and raised in France, he is, to his detractors here, something of a brassy American in finely tailored Dior. In much of the world, his success in building a wildly profitable, global conglomerate is viewed with envy. But in France, flash, money and wheeling and dealing are still regarded as a bit crass, and Mr. Arnault's style of business has often ruffled feathers.

Few are as wary of Mr. Arnault right now as the Hermes clan, which includes more than 70 members and now comprises three branches: Dumas, Puech and Guerrand. Mr. Arnault says that he believes the family, now in its sixth and seventh generations, will ultimately bend to market forces. The family says it will not.

Mr. Arnault says Hermes has nothing to fear. LVMH burnishes the brands it buys, he says. It does not compromise luxury through commercialization.

That thinking also applies to Hermes. "I would never diminish the quality of Hermes," he says. "Hermes can be an even rarer and greater quality business, if they ever wanted to work with us."

For instance, Mr. Arnault would like to see Hermes leave duty-free stores at airports, eliminate all discounts and bring in younger employees. He did away with discounts at Louis Vuitton in an effort to elevate its monogrammed leather handbags and other accessories. In doing so, he imbued those products with an elitist quality and made them must-have items, especially among the rising ranks of the world's nouveaux riches.

The accusation that LVMH is interested only in the mass market clearly rankles Mr. Arnault. "Vuitton and Dior have a culture and a history," he says. "It's on that basis that I fought to have the LVMH group. It's not about making brands commercial or trying to make cheaper products. And Hermes has absolutely nothing to fear from me in that regard."

Those vows have not placated Mr. Thomas: At a press briefing Friday announcing Hermes results, he likened Mr. Arnault's incursion to the rape of a beautiful woman, and called on him to reduce his stake to 10 percent to prove he is peaceful. Mr. Arnault said in the interview that he would not reduce his stake.

In the meantime, the Hermes family is rallying to keep its company out of Mr. Arnault's hands, although the French news media have speculated that some of the younger members might eventually look to sell.

Axel Dumas, 40, is a passionate member of the sixth generation at Hermes. He says that, if anything, Mr. Arnault's uninvited presence has brought even the youngest generations into solidarity with the old.

"In a way, this brought all of us closer together," said Mr. Dumas, who will soon take over as chief operating officer. "There's always arguments within a family, but the fact is that after the announcement, everybody joined ranks without even discussing it. They want to protect Hermes."

IT was 35 years ago that Bernard Arnault first stormed the French fashion establishment. After a brief stint in the United States, where he tried unsuccessfully to expand his family's real estate interests, Mr. Arnault returned to France in 1984, at a time when President Francois Mitterrand was looking to put state companies into private hands.

What happened next set Mr. Arnault on his course toward LVMH: After buying Boussac, he surprised the government by winding down the textile businesses and eliminating thousands of jobs -- to focus on Dior.

Not long afterward, Mr. Arnault, still relatively unknown at the time, was invited to buy into LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton by its patriarch, Henry Racamier. Mr. Arnault soon outflanked both Mr. Racamier and Alain Chevalier, the chief of Moet Hennessy, to take control of LVMH in 1990.

That bitter battle angered Mr. Racamier and his family and sealed Mr. Arnault's reputation as a brilliant, American-style corporate raider who ignored the unwritten codes of French business.

Over the years, the first families of European luxury fell to LVMH one by one: Celine, whose Etoile blouse was inspired by the star-shaped roads radiating from the Place de l'Etoile in Paris; Guerlain, the maker of Shalimar perfume; Fendi, the Rome fashion house where Karl Lagerfeld is creative director; Chateau d'Yquem, which produces premier Sauternes wine -- the list goes on. Today LVMH has more than 60 brands under its control.

Critics say that Mr. Arnault did not just buy out families -- but that he broke them, and compromised the artisanal essence of their companies. He has tended to swoop in when a family business is most vulnerable, when it is changing shareholders or when a younger generation is taking over.

"It is this capitalistic moment that permits LVMH to take participation," Mr. Arnault said. "But that has nothing to do with the way afterward that we manage the brand." He says he has revitalized the souls of tired brands, even if he swept out managers who refused to change with the times.

The financial results speak for themselves: Sales at LVMH rose 19 percent last year and, for the first time, exceeded 20 billion euros. Profits soared 73 percent, to 3 billion euros. Revenue from fashion and leather goods, like Louis Vuitton purses, was up 20 percent.

"Mr. Arnault is an absolutely wonderful performer when the game is tough," said Armando Branchini, whose consulting firm, InterCorporate of Milan, advises luxury companies on strategy. "On top of that, he has got this special psychological ability to detect where the vulnerabilities lie, particularly among families and shareholders."

INSIDE Hermes's soaring, light-filled atelier in the Pantin suburb of Paris, workers take fine cuts of leather, alligator and python skins and transform them with meticulous detail, waxing threads and buffing hides with an agate stone into subtle matte finishes or high, lustrous shines. Many of the employees have worked here for decades.

A single Birkin bag, named after the actress Jane Birkin, can take 15 to 23 hours to make, and cost 3,500 to more than 40,000 euros.

These traditions stretch back to 1837, when Thierry Hermes began making leather harnesses in his workshop near Le Madeleine in Paris. A century later, Hermes was making high-end leather products for car travel. The first Hermes scarf appeared in 1937. In the 1950s, Hermes christened its Kelly bag, after Grace Kelly, who was photographed carrying one everywhere. Last year, Hermes turned a profit of 421.7 million euros on sales of 2.4 billion euros.

One February morning in Pantin, Mr. Dumas pointed to a large Birkin bag that required four Australian marine crocodile skins, instead of the usual three, to obtain a perfectly symmetrical pattern. Such extravagances cost money, but no matter: Hermes artisans never skimp to achieve a lower price point, something they fear that LVMH would press them to do.

"We never discuss price," Mr. Dumas says. "We are never thinking that we can sell X number of bags if we lowered the cost. We don't need to create a halo effect to sell a purse."

Indeed, one of the family's biggest worries is that Mr. Arnault seems so comfortable discussing money, a subject that is almost taboo at Hermes. Family members recoil as they recall an LVMH official's suggestion that Hermes bolster sales by creating a line of lower-priced bags.

"It's exactly what you shouldn't do," Mr. Dumas says. "Because you will make a cheap Hermes bag which will sell like hotcakes for three years, and after three years people will say, 'Hermes is not what it used to be.' "

Mr. Thomas says: "If you tell me I have to double the profit of Hermes, I will do it tomorrow. But then you'd have no Hermes left in five years."

ONE Saturday last October, Mr. Thomas was riding his bicycle in rural Auvergne, in south-central France, whose rocky peaks form the backbone of the Massif Central.

His cellphone buzzed. It was Mr. Arnault, and he had unsettling news: In two hours, LVMH would announce to the world that it had acquired 17 percent of Hermes. And, Mr. Arnault added, LVMH would probably buy more.

Mr. Thomas was taken aback by the size of Mr. Arnault's stake, which has since risen to 20 percent. This was not the way business was done, he thought -- not in France, and certainly not among gentlemen. Mr. Arnault had not even had the courtesy to seek an audience with Hermes first.

But Mr. Arnault was not asking. He was telling. "We immediately understood that it was a hostile move," Mr. Thomas said. "We got a stab in the back."

Mr. Arnault had quietly amassed his stake in Hermes not by buying its stock in the open market but by wielding one of the most potent weapons in finance: derivatives. He used instruments called equity swaps that essentially gave him the option to buy a big chunk of Hermes over a certain time.

LVMH executives say they had been concerned that another player -- perhaps from China, or a private-equity firm, or maybe even Richemont, another French luxury conglomerate -- was moving in on Hermes. So, last October, LVMH exercised its option.

Mr. Arnault later said he was "surprised" to find himself a large shareholder in Hermes.

The Hermes family promptly united against Mr. Arnault. Already protected by a limited partnership, the family, which currently holds 72 percent of Hermes, is now seeking to create a special company to hold more than 50 percent of its shares in the business, in an effort to prevent another incursion. Mr. Arnault has said he will not try to buy more. But his stake is now so large that Hermes is at risk of being delisted from the Paris stock exchange, Mr. Thomas says.

Industry insiders say the family was naive to think that Hermes could remain independent as a publicly traded company, or that anyone would play by the old rules. Hermes sold stock on the Paris bourse in 1993, a move that greatly enriched family members.

"If you don't want to be taken over, don't put your business in the public market," Karl Lagerfeld said of Hermes soon after Mr. Arnault announced his investment.

That point is not lost on Mr. Thomas. "Yes, we are naive, but between utopia and naivete there is a very thin margin," he said. "I don't think that the fate of this world is to choose between eating and being eaten."

Both LVMH and Hermes are now hunkering down for a cold war.

CROWDS gathered on Friday at the Rodin Museum on the Left Bank for a showing of Dior's spring ready-to-wear collection. Paris Fashion Week for ready-to-wear runs through Wednesday, but whatever buzz that Dior's line generates is bound to be drowned out by the fashion world's collective gasp over John Galliano.

Mr. Galliano was supposed to attend Friday's show for another triumphant trip down the catwalk. He didn't. After issuing an apology on Wednesday for his anti-Semitic remarks, he reportedly left France and entered a rehab center, at the urging of colleagues and friends like Naomi Campbell and Kate Moss. Last week, the Paris prosecutor announced that Mr. Galliano would stand trial for racial insults. Instead of Mr. Galliano at fashion week, there was Mr. Toledano of Dior, surrounded by paparazzi and taking center stage because Mr. Arnault did not attend. Mr. Toledano read the following statement:

"What has happened over the last week has been a terrible and wrenching ordeal for all of us. It has been deeply painful to see the Dior name associated with the disgraceful statements attributed to its designer, however brilliant he may be."

He continued: "So now, more than ever, we must publicly recommit ourselves to the values of the House of Dior."

Coco Chanel once said, "Fashion fades; only style remains the same." That is a sentiment the Hermes family seems to share. Whatever the trend, whatever the market, Hermes remains Hermes. But in the 21st-century business of luxury, time and money are on Mr. Arnault's side.

Even as it works through its problems with Dior, LVMH will wait for Hermes -- "one century, or even two centuries," says Pierre Gode, who has been Mr. Arnault's right-hand man for 30 years. "If the family ever wants to leave, we believe we're capable of soothing away all these fears that we're mass market."

Mr. Dumas at Hermes says his family will never sell. But neither does he expect Mr. Arnault to go away quietly. All the family can do, Mr. Dumas says, is stand firm in what its members see as a battle for the very soul of Hermes.

"If it doesn't destroy us," Mr. Dumas says, "it will make us stronger."
