Because the school system operates on such a huge scale -- 860,000 meals a day, which means, for example, seven million gallons of milk a year -- it can pressure vendors to cut the unhealthy elements out of prepared food while lowering the price. A nifty business plan in theory, but as Mr. Goldstein put it: "It comes down to: you have a child, you have a tray, you have food. Is it going to be good? Are they going to eat it?"

At Public School 56, in the Clinton Hill neighborhood of , a school so focused on good that large portions of its courtyard have been given over to a vegetable , theory meets practice every morning at 10:30 with the first of three lunch shifts.

On Wednesday, the cafeteria ladies were ladling out Latin Rice Bowls: chicken tenders, Spanish rice, sweet plantains and a red pepper sauce.

Tasty enough, but it didn't quite seem like a revolution in fresh-food consciousness. The school's nutritionist, Yokasta De Jesus, said the plantain was playing the role of a vegetable, which is some fairly ambitious casting for a starchy piece of fruit. The rice was more starch after that, and the chicken tenders were breaded. Many students crowned the plate with a slice of bread.

That bread, though, was whole wheat, the chicken tenders were not fried but baked, almost every kid grabbed a piece of fresh fruit, and many stopped by the salad bar on their way to their seats.

Astonishingly many, in fact. And they were all too happy to talk about why. "I'm a quarterback on the football team, so I've got to stay healthy, got to get my arms strong," said Kayron Evans, 10, who had made room on his plate for mixed dressed greens. He eats salad before and after dinner, he said, but skips pork and candy. "I eat fried chicken," Kayron admitted, "but I don't eat it with trans fat."

Naje Scott, a fourth grader, led her friends in a predictable critique of the cafeteria's food. They try to push too many new things. They should have more and cheese sticks. But, worst of all, the students said, on Mondays there is no salad bar. "It makes me sad when they don't have salad," said Stephanie Maduku, 9. Her friends agreed: the more salad, the better.

Throughout the country, despite all the consciousness-raising menu-expanding work that the organic, locavore and slow-food revolution has done, the bottom line is that Americans are eating fewer and fewer vegetables. At home or in restaurants, at lunch or at dinner, it's just not happening, one study after another shows.

At P.S. 56, however, students are heading back to the salad bar for seconds. Anecdotal evidence also suggests that such habits make their way home to influence their families. The food industry, meanwhile, has been forced to reckon with an enormous school system determined to do better by its children's bellies. And with manufacturers offering so many more healthful, affordable options, other school systems are finding it easier to follow New York's lead.

All of this raises the possibility that those cafeteria ladies, with their hairnets and their soup ladles, may be doing more to change the way America eats than all the independent documentaries and books and markets combined. It's an astonishing fact considering they operate on a food budget of $1 per meal.

When she finished bemoaning the occasional absence of salad, Stephanie recited a line she knew would get a smile: "Lunch is my favorite subject." Kids have been making that joke for ages. But with so much attention now being directed to the midday meal, and with New York schools treating nutrition as an essential part of students' education, it may not be a joke after all.
